_drafts/testing-vs-quality.markdown, before:

---
layout: post
title:  "Testing vs Quality"
date:   2019-05-03 17:13:01 +0100
categories: testing
---
Testing and quality. For a lot of people, these two words are so closely linked that it is tough to tell them apart. They think that the solution for bad software quality is to test more. The truth is very different. Let me make it as clear as possible:
>Testing does not raise quality!
I expect that a lot of readers will challenge this statement. This is quite understandable, as testing and quality are related, but the relationship is much looser. Testing can show you the **absence** of quality, by exposing the bugs in your software to the light of day. However, it can only proof the presence of bugs and not the inverse: Just because you didn't find any bugs, doesn't mean that there aren't any left in the code. So, testing is a quality check and not even a very reliable one. Nevertheless, testing has an impact on quality if you find bugs and decide to fix them. Afterwards, your code hopefully will be in a better state than before. This is why so many people directly link testing and quality, but this is an oversimplification. Just as you don't fill up your gas tank, just be checking how much is left, you don't raise your software quality just be testing it. Instead, you have to take action and explicitly improve the software quality.

To cover:
	Tests don't raise quality
	Tests can only proof the existence of bugs, not their absence
	No "fig-leave" testing
	You need to adress the findings
	If you have poor quality, testing is not the answer
	Manual testing is a poor investment
	Guided manual testing is dehumanizing and pointless

Commit message:

First full version of testing vs. quality post

_drafts/testing-vs-quality.markdown, after:

---
layout: post
title:  "Testing vs Quality"
date:   2019-05-03 17:13:01 +0100
categories: testing
---
Testing and quality: For a lot of people, these two words are so closely linked that it is tough to tell them apart. They think that the solution for bad software quality is to test more. The truth is very different. Let me make it as clear as possible:
>Testing does not raise quality!
I expect that a lot of readers will challenge this statement. This is quite understandable, as testing and quality are related, but the relationship is much looser than many think. Testing can show you the **absence** of quality, by exposing the bugs in your software to the light of day. However, it can only proof the presence of bugs and not the inverse: Just because you didn't find any bugs, doesn't mean that there aren't any left in the code. So, testing is a quality check and not even a very reliable one. Nevertheless, testing has an impact on quality if you find bugs and decide to fix them. Afterwards, your code hopefully will be in a better state than before. This is why so many people directly link testing and quality, but this is an oversimplification. Just as you don't fill up your gas tank by checking how much is left, you don't raise your software quality just by testing. Instead, you have to take action and explicitly improve the software quality.

So, what **does** raise software quality? Among others: Fixing bugs, removing code smells, removing (deprecation) warnings, improving performance and making your software easier to use. As already mentioned, those activities might be the *result* of (manual) testing you did before. Hence, it is very important to keep in mind that somebody has to react to the test findings for the testing to have any effect at all. This may sound obvious, but often testing is done so late in the software development lifecycle that there simply is not enough time to address the findings. This means that the issue will either remain unfixed or will be handled only in a later release. I like to call this kind of testing *fig leaf testing*. The term is inspired by the stone fig leaf which often covers the private parts of old statues. It serves no purpose except for hiding certain parts. Testing on such a late notice is equally useless, it only serves as a cover so you can state with confidence that you did indeed test your software.

With that in mind, what kind of testing should you do? First of all, you should **always** use automated tests over manual tests. Manual testing is a bad investment, as any time used is gone forever. Writing a good automated test will pay back in multiples in the future if you frequently change the code it covers. Manual testing should be limited to things a computer **cannot** check (e.g. usability testing). The absolute worst way to test are guided manual tests. Here, so-called test cases are written: Long documents which contain a list of steps the tester has to execute and what he needs to check during testing. "Executing" those test cases is absolutely soul crushing and naturally error-prone as humans are not made for following dozens of steps to the letter hundreds of times a day. Don't use test cases!

If you are currently not satisfied with your code quality, testing more is not the answer. You probably have more than enough quality issues already in your backlog / bug tracker to keep you busy for a while. Instead, you need to identify why your code quality became so bad in the first place. It probably is caused by a combination of time pressure, sloppy developers and a lack of priority on quality. Those need to be fixed first. Then, you can start slowly improving the quality of your code. Write more automated tests, add static code checks, get a decent continous integration pipeline so that it is impossible to merge code into master which breaks tests etc. It will take time, but with each passing month your code will become a little bit better. In general, it takes longer to clean up a codebase than it does to mess it up, but it is possible nevertheless. As you cannot drop everything and just improve the code, you will have to do it in an iterative manner. Don't be discouraged by the slow pace: It is a marathon, not a sprint.

To wrap up: Testing does not raise your quality, it can only prove the existence of bugs in your code. You will not improve your quality by testing more. Manual testing is a bad investment and should be minimized.
